you're probably going to quit your New
Year's resolution, and that's okay. Most
people do. Studies actually show that
it's around 80 to 90% of people quit
their New Year's resolution. And that's
because most people don't actually want
to change on a deep internal level. And
with New Year's resolutions going into
2026, people just go about changing
their life in the completely wrong way.
And to me, that's sad because if you're
changing your life, that has to be one
of the most important things in your
life, right? That has to be the only
thing on your mind, you think. But for
most people, it's just another thing to
try to do and fail and go back to the
life they were living. So when people
try to change their life, what they do
is they create a New Year's resolution
because everyone else does. And humans
want to impress others more than they
want to impress themselves. We create
superficial meaning out of status games,
but they don't meet the requirements for
true change, which goes a lot deeper
than convincing yourself you're going to
be more disciplined or productive this
year. Now, I'm not here to talk down on
you. I've quit 10 times as many goals
than I've set. Many of you have probably
noticed that. I mean, my face is online.
The book that I said I was writing, I'm
not writing it anymore. And I think that
should be the case for most people. I
think you should quit more goals than
you set because how else are you going
to narrow in on the correct goals, but
the fact that people try to change their
life and utterly fail almost every time
still holds true and that's a problem.
So much so that the gym becomes
extremely crowded during January and
then by February it's all cleared out.
It's a meme. Now, as much as I think
that New Year's resolutions are stupid,
I feel like many of you also think that
they're stupid. I always think that it's
wise to reflect on your life and change
direction and do something that you've
always wanted to do and what better time
to do it than now. The other thing here
is that human nature is kind of a
And the worst feeling is when you make a
promise to yourself and then you end up
breaking it, especially if it's over and
over again because you start to feel
helpless. And if you don't know what
you're doing, you may continue that
cycle for years on end, always wanting
to change but never being able to. So
whether you want to start the business,
transform your body, or take the risk
toward a meaningful life without
quitting after two weeks, I want to
share seven of probably the most
impactful ideas that I've ever shared
that you probably haven't heard before
on behavior change, psychology, and
productivity so you can do just that in
2026. Now, this is going to be
comprehensive. This is not going to be
one of those videos that you just watch
and forget about. I hope you treat it
like that. This is something you will
want to save to your watch later, to
bookmark on your phone, to take notes
on, and you will have to set aside time
to think about it. We're going to go
over six ideas. And then in the seventh
quote unquote idea, it's actually a
protocol. And what we're going to do is
we're going to dig very deep into your
psyche. And if you take this seriously,
you're going to get quite emotional. And
it will take about a full day to
complete. If you do this, your life will
change in one day. Now, all I ask is
that you dedicate your full attention to
this. I know that you're used to just
scrolling on social media and watching
and binge watching YouTube videos, but
it's rare that you come across one video
that just has the potential to change
everything. And I hope that this video
acts as that for you. Let's begin. The
first idea is that you aren't where you
want to be because you aren't the person
who would be there. Now when it comes to
New Year's resolutions, people tend to
focus on one out of the two things that
are required for change and success. So
the first is changing your actions to
make progress toward the goal. This is
the least important thing and what most
people do. It is second order. And the
second thing is changing who you are so
that your behavior naturally follows.
This is the most important thing. This
is first order. Most people set surface
level goals, hype themselves up to
remain disciplined for the first few
weeks, then go back to their old ways
without much struggle because they were
trying to build a great life on a
rotting foundation. So, if this doesn't
make sense, let's run through a quick
example. I want you to think about
somebody successful. It could be a
founder, a CEO, a bodybuilder with a
incredible physique on Instagram, or
just a charismatic dude who can walk
into a group and start chatting everyone
up like it's just second nature to them.
Now, I want you to really think about
this because this this has to click for
you in order for you to understand that
behavior change is changing who you are.
Do you think the bodybuilder has to
grind to eat healthy? Do they have to
grind like everyone tells you you need
to do? Oh, you need to grind, you need
to struggle, you need to suffer in order
to eat healthy. Does the CEO or the
founder have to discipline themselves to
show up and lead the team? This is
actually something my co-founder Matt
and I were talking about earlier about
how in our past nine-to-five jobs, we
were just the worst employees ever. And
so, when we're going about hiring that's
constantly on our mind, what if we hire
someone who just isn't as passionate
about what we do as we are? Because to
us, we just wake up and do the thing to
the employee who may not be a fit.
They're going to completely sabotage our
business. They're not going to care.
They're going to get their work done
late. They're not going to listen. And
no matter how much I motivate them as a
founder or I train them to do the thing
or incentivize them, that type of person
just isn't a fit and they're not going
to do what they need to do. It's because
their identity doesn't match the
behavior required for our business. Now,
to you on the surface, it may seem like
the bodybuilder has to grind to eat
healthy, or they're so disciplined, or
the runner has to discipline themselves
to go run a marathon, or the CEO has to
discipline themselves to show up and
work. But the truth is, they can't see
themselves living any other way. The
bodybuilder has to grind to eat
unhealthy. The CEO has to grind and
force themselves to sleep in past their
alarm clock or to take it easy at night
and watch Netflix. And when they do
sleep past their alarm clock or they do
feel like they're unproductive, they
hate every second of it, just like you
hate every second of working towards
your goal because you don't have the
right identity to match the behavior
required to achieve that goal. And to
some people, my own lifestyle seems
pretty extreme or pretty disciplined.
Like when I got on a podcast this past
year and they're like, "You seem like
the most disciplined person ever." And
I'm just like, I mean, not really. It's
not I don't know. To me, it's just
natural. And I don't say that to
contrast it or compare it to anybody
else's lifestyle. I'm not saying my
lifestyle is better. I'm just saying I
simply enjoy living this way. Like when
my mom tells me that I need to take a
break or go out or let loose a bit, I
have to like hold my tongue because I
don't want to be rude or dismissive
because through my mind I'm just I'm
just thinking if I weren't having fun,
why would I be doing what I'm doing? And
that's the major mismatch is people
can't answer that. They're not doing the
thing that's fun. They're doing what
society told them they should do. Now,
do not take this next sentence lightly
because this ties it all together. If
you want a specific outcome in life, you
must have the lifestyle that creates
that outcome long before you reach it.
So, if someone says they want to lose 30
lbs of fat, I often don't believe them.
Not because I don't think they're a
person that's incapable of it, but
because there's just too many times when
that same person says that they can't
wait to get back to the life they used
to live. Oh, I can't wait until I can
eat this again. I can't wait until I
don't have to do cardio again. And
that's the thing. I hate to break it to
you, but if you don't adopt the
lifestyle that led to you losing weight
for life and find a reason with a higher
gravitational pull than the one tying
you to your previous ways, then you will
go back straight to where you started
and you can unhappily say that you
wasted the only resource that you have,
which is time. When you truly change
yourself, all of your habits that don't
move the needle toward your goal become
disgusting because you have a deep and
profound awareness of what kind of life
those actions compound into. You are
okay with your current standards because
you are not fully aware of what they are
or what they lead to. And we're going to
discuss how to uncover that. But you
need this awareness first. You need to
understand your mind. So that leads to
point number two, which is you aren't
where you want to be because you don't
actually want to be there. To start this
off with a quote from Alfred Adler,
trust only movement. Life happens at the
level of events, not of words. Trust
movement. So if you want to change who
you are, you must understand how the
mind works. That way you can start to
reprogram it. The first step to
understanding the mind is to understand
that all behavior is goal oriented. When
you think about it, this is kind of
obvious, but when we dig into it, most
people don't want to hear it. You take a
step forward with your foot because you
want to reach a certain location. That's
a goal. You scratch your nose because
you want to get rid of the itch. That's
a goal. Those are very surface level
kind of meaningless goals. And those
ones are obvious as well, but there are
greater unconscious goals that are
creating the sub goals that you're
working to at all times. You may not
even realize that sitting down on the
couch to relax or scroll doom scrolling
on your phone came from a bigger goal
that was injected into your mind either
at birth during conditioning or by
society by doing something they want you
to do or just by your own goal of
protection or safety or pleasure or
feeling good that you're just not aware
of and you don't think anything of it
because it's just natural. It's an
unconscious process. You do it like you
breathe. You don't even notice it. And
on an even more unconscious and complex
level, we often pursue goals without
knowing it that harm us. But we tend to
justify our actions in a way that is
socially acceptable or makes us not feel
like a loser. As an example, if you
can't stop procrastinating on your work,
you may justify it with the fact that
you lack discipline, but in reality,
you're attempting to achieve a goal like
you always are. In this case, that goal
could be to protect yourself from the
judgment that comes from finishing and
sharing your work. So, it's not that you
lack discipline. It's that you're afraid
of achieving one goal, so you justify it
by making not achieving that goal your
goal. Another prime example is that if
you say you want to quit a dead-end job,
but you stay in it, you may start to
think that you just don't have enough
courage or you're not a risktaker. But
the truth is is that you're pursuing the
goal of safety and predictability and an
excuse not to look like a failure in
front of everyone you told that you want
to quit your job. So the lesson here
with point number two is that real
change requires changing your goals. But
I don't mean setting some surface level
goal because the act of doing that
serves an unconscious goal that is
actually harming you. That's been ran
through enough in the productivity
space. I mean changing your point of
view because that's what a goal is. A
goal is a projection into the future
that acts as a lens of perception which
allows you to notice information, ideas,
and resources that aid in you achieving
that goal. If that didn't make any
sense, it's important. But if that
didn't make any sense, that's what point
number three is for, which is you aren't
where you want to be because you're
afraid to be there. So, let's start with
another quote from Maxwell Maltz. The
important thing for you to remember is
that it does not matter in the least how
you got the idea or where it came from.
You may never have been formally
hypnotized. But if you have accepted an
idea from yourself, your teachers, your
parents, friends, advertisements from
any other source, and further, if you
are firmly convinced that idea is true,
it has the same power over you as the
hypnotist words have over a hypnotized
subject. So that's compelling. And what
I'm about to share with you is even more
compelling because I've condensed just
how you become who you are into this
series of steps. Now these are not like
what happen every time but this is just
how identity is shaped and formed which
shapes your action. So if you understand
this cuz we're reverse engineering it
right now then we can start to put the
pieces together to okay how do we change
our identity so that our behavior
naturally follows going into 2026 or any
other year. So this is the anatomy of
identity. First you want to achieve a
goal. Then you perceive reality through
the lens of that goal. Meaning you only
notice important information and ideas
that allow you to achieve that goal.
This is the learning process. This is
how you learn things. Then fourth, you
act toward that goal and receive
feedback that you're progressing toward
it. Fifth, you repeat that behavior
until it becomes automatic and
unconscious. This is conditioning.
Sixth, that behavior becomes a part of
who you think you are. I am the type of
person who dot dot dot. Seventh, you
defend your identity to maintain
psychological consistency. We'll talk
about that more. And eighth, your
identity shapes new goals, restarting
the cycle. And if that identity is
disadvantageous toward a good life, this
gets very bad very quick. Now, the
unfortunate reality is that you have to
break this cycle between step six and
step seven because you've already gone
through this many times in your life.
And it started when you were first born,
when you didn't even have any control
over your mind. Because when you're a
kid, you have the goal of survival.
That's literally your goal is I'm this
babbling blob of flesh coming out into
the world. I don't know how to speak. I
don't know anything. I don't know how to
survive. And it's just like, oh my gosh,
the only instinct is like, I need to
live. That's not even a conscious
instinct. That's just the instinct that
you're born with. And because of this,
you are dependent on your parents to
teach you how to survive. Because when
we think about it, maybe you don't even
have that instinct of survival, but
other people around you do. Like that's
just the natural order of things is you
have to survive. And so the thing there
is that you had to conform. You had to
conform to what your parents believe,
what your parents taught you. And your
parents, unless they broke the pattern
themselves, they probably have the same
conditioning or beliefs or ideas or
values as their culture or their parents
or their parents' parents or the
industrial age or all of these goals
that may not serve you and what you
actually want. And since the way most
people teach is through reward and
punishment, if you don't conform to
their values and goals, if you don't
become their child mentally, then they
may kick you out. They may punish you.
Well, they will punish you. They're
going to say, "No, that's not the way
you do things. You do things this way."
And you don't know any better as a kid.
So, you listen. And the thing here is
that you don't ever actually think for
yourself. You don't have a single
original thought unless you can see
through this. If you have never
questioned this, then you are not an
independent thinker. And nobody, I would
argue, is a completely independent
thinker. There's degrees. There's a
spectrum. Now, to take this a layer
deeper, because we're going very deep
here, hopefully once you fulfill your
physical survival needs, which is pretty
easy to do, at least in today's world,
it happens pretty quick. Then you start
to survive on the conceptual or
ideological level. You may not try to
protect or reproduce your body anymore,
but your mind is different. You still
have that instinct. It just transcends
to a new level. You don't try to
reproduce your genes, although you do.
You try to reproduce memes or
information or beliefs or ideas or
values. You can see this everywhere on
the internet. We're in this mental or
spiritual war of ideas because when your
body feels threatened, you go into fight
or flight. When your identity or your
mental body, so to say, feels
threatened, you do the same thing. If
you are heavily identified with
something like a political ideology by
the process we just talked about because
you probably adopted your political
ideology from your parents or another
group that you found online and even if
you rejected your parents beliefs you
fell into another set of beliefs when
you were young that shaped your ideas
and if that crystallizes that does very
bad things. You can no longer think
clearly or nuanced or see the big
picture. And when someone challenges
those beliefs you will feel threatened.
You will feel that stress response. You
feel emotionally like you were slapped
in the face. And since most people don't
analyze their emotions for truth, you
tend to get stuck in echo chambers and
just double down on your beliefs. The
same thing happens if you're raised in a
religious household. If those ideas
actually stick with you, then you're
going to fight and lash out. Maybe not
extremely or physically, but in defense
at people who are challenging you. I
grew up LDS. I grew up Mormon. I saw
this firsthand every single day and it
just didn't make sense to me. When you
ask a question to a leader of the
church, they just like go through this
regurgitated script of things that
didn't make sense to me. And now that's
nothing against that religion or any
religion. I actually now enjoy viewing
different perspectives online. I listen
to a lot of Christian content. I listen
to a lot of atheist content. I'm not
identified with either side because that
prevents me from seeing truth. And
lastly, this same thing happens not for
politics or religion, but for
everything. For your job. Do you
identify as a lawyer? Do you identify as
a gamer? Do you identify as someone who
would not take the actions to the life
that you want to live? Now, point number
four, the life you want lies within a
specific level of mind because the mind
evolves through predictable stages over
time. We've talked about this many
times. People love this subject. It's a
freaking mind-blowing subject. But when
you're born, you're like this little
survival sponge that just soaks up as
many beliefs as it can to survive so
that you can feel safe and secure. And
if you don't be careful, you can easily,
very easily, get trapped in one of these
stages. And this has been documented
thoroughly through models like Maslo's
hierarchy of needs or Suzanne Cook
Reer's nine stages of ego development or
uh Christopher Cowan and Don Beck's
spiral dynamics. These have each built
on top of each other and evolved and
become more comprehensive and applied to
multiple domains. And while it's not
completely like pinpoint accurate all of
the time, it's a big picture. It's like
orienting generalizations so we can at
least see the patterns and identify
them. And since I've talked about this
so much, I've talked about it in my
human 3.0 newsletter, which is more like
a like a cornerstone article that I
think everyone should read. I'll link to
that in the description. It's pretty
long, but it's thorough. If you if you
want to understand how to achieve
anything in your life, I think I
dissected it quite well there. But let's
go over the 8020 of this just so you get
a refresher or you understand what we're
talking about so we can move on. If
you've already heard this, just
understand that repetition is important
for important things. So stage one of
development is the impulsive stage where
there's no separation between impulse
and action. It's black and white
thinking. As an example, a toddler hits
when angry because the feeling and the
behavior are the same thing. Stage two
is self-protective, where the world is
dangerous and you learn to look out for
yourself, like how a kid learns to hide
report cards, lie about chores, and
figure out what adults want to hear.
Stage three is conformist, where you are
your group and its rules feel like
reality itself, which is like someone
who genuinely cannot fathom why anyone
would vote differently than their family
or group or would have a different
religion. Stage four is self-aware,
where you notice you have an inner life
that doesn't match the exterior. So,
it's like sitting in church and
realizing you're not sure. You believe
what everyone around you seems to
believe, but not knowing what to do with
that feeling yet. That is me in my past.
Stage five is conscientious, where you
build your own system of principles and
hold yourself accountable to them. So,
like leaving your family's religion
after careful study and adopting a
personal philosophy you can defend, or
building a career plan with clear
milestones because you believe the right
efforts yield the right results. Stage
six is the individualist stage where you
see that your principles were shaped by
context and start holding them more
loosely. As an example, realizing your
political views have more to do with
where you grew up than objective truth
or noticing that your ambitious career
goals were really about earning your
father's approval. Stage seven is the
strategist stage where you work with
systems while aware of your own
involvement in them. So it's like
leading an organization while actively
questioning your own blind spots or
engaging in politics knowing your
perspective is partial and shaped by
bias you can't fully see. Stage eight is
construct aare where you see all
frameworks including your identity as
useful fictions. So it's like holding
your spiritual beliefs metaphorically
rather than literally. It's knowing that
the map is not the territory or watching
yourself play the role of founder or
thought leader with a kind of gentle
amusement. I've done this a few times. I
don't know if I'm fully construct aware
because with these they're like tools,
right? They're like lenses. If you're
stressed, you're going to regress into a
more conformous stage or more survival
stage, so to say, because you're going
to feel more threatened. But I think
that people mostly operate within like
80% of their life within a specific
level. And that level slowly increases
over time with certain aspects or
domains of their life branching into
other levels. And stage nine is the
unitive stage where separation between
self and life dissolves. As an example,
work, rest, and play feel like the same
thing. There's no one left who needs to
become something. Just presence
responding to what arises. Now, the
spiritual people out there will hear
this and praise the ninth unit of stage.
But we have to understand that all of
these are like tools in the toolbox.
They're lenses of perception. They're
not necessarily better than one another,
but they're larger, higher, more
inclusive than one another. They're more
complex. Sometimes the highest stage
being at a unitive stage doesn't allow
you to solve a certain problem or make
progress in a certain area of your life.
But the thing about the higher stages is
that you have all of the lower stages as
a tool in your tool belt so that you can
tap into them or pull them out when you
need them from a higher perspective.
Now, for most people watching this, I
would assume you're between levels four
and eight mostly. So, those who are
closer to eight and watching this are
doing so as like a refresher or just to
pass the time. But those who are closer
to four, you may not know what you want
out of life. You feel like you're meant
for more, but you can't make sense of
everything yet. But that's a good thing
because there is a pattern. There is a
way to move through these stages and get
closer to the life that you want. So
that leads to point number five, which
is that intelligence is the ability to
get what you want out of life. And we'll
start with this great quote. The only
real test of intelligence is if you get
what you want out of life. That's the
classic viral quote from Naval. Now,
there is a formula to success. One
ingredient is agency, which we just
talked about in the last video. One
ingredient is opportunity, which many
people like to mistake as privilege
because they lack the other ingredients.
And the last ingredient is intelligence.
So if you have high agency but low
opportunity, it doesn't matter how
likely you are to act toward a goal
because it isn't a goal that will bear
much fruit. If you have opportunity and
agency but low intelligence, then you
will never be fully able to benefit from
that opportunity. Now, we've talked
about agency, but in terms of
opportunity, I can't really control your
physical location. I can tell you to
move, but that's a big ask. That's up to
you. But if you don't see the
opportunity in the digital world or on
the internet that's right in front of
you, I don't know what to tell you. If
if you want to realize what that is, go
watch any of my other videos. So with
that said, in this video, I want to
focus on what intelligence is in the
context of those two other gradients and
of the context of this video.
Cybernetics comes from the Greek word
kuberneticos, which means to steer or
good at steering. It's also known as the
art of getting what you want. That's
when we apply it as like a a frame for
viewing the world as a human. For a
machine, it's just an intelligent system
that course corrects toward a goal. It's
like AI. It actually is the original
word for AI, but somebody I forget who
didn't like the word cybernetics, so
they changed it to artificial
intelligence. So, if Nal's definition of
intelligence is to get what you want out
of life, then cybernetics or
understanding it helps you do it that
much faster. So what cybernetics
illustrates is the properties of an
intelligent system which is to have a
goal, act toward the goal, sense where
you are, compare it to the goal, and act
again based on feedback. It's trial and
error. It's experimentation. It's a
scientific process. But there's a key
point here that most people miss. You
can judge intelligence based on the
systems ability to iterate and persist
with trial and error. A ship blown off
course that corrects towards its
destination. a thermostat sensing a
change in heat and turning on the
pancreas in your body excreting insulin
after blood glucose spikes. So, what
does this have to do with getting what
you want out of life? Everything acting,
sensing, comparing, and understanding
the system from a meta perspective is
fundamental to high intelligence. High
intelligence is the ability to iterate,
persist, and understand the big picture.
The mark of low intelligence is the
inability to learn from your mistakes.
Low intelligence people get stuck on
problems rather than solving them. They
hit a roadblock and quit. Like a writer
who fails to build a readership and
quits because they lack the ability to
try new things, experiment, and figure
out a process that works for them. To
think that there isn't an effective
process you can create is verifiably
false. No matter your limiting beliefs,
hence being low intelligence. We're
actually going to talk about why artists
hate AI so much in a future video. I've
been planning that one and doing a lot
of research on that one. And don't get
your panties all in a bunch just yet if
you're an artist. But usually it from
what I've seen it's just pointing to
this definition of low intelligence. Now
high intelligence is realizing that any
problem can be solved on a large enough
time scale. The reality is that you can
achieve any goal you set your mind to.
This isn't something that can be
disproven within reason. Intelligence is
realizing that there is a series of
choices you can make which lead to
achieving the goal you want. You
understand that ideas are hierarchical
and that you can't go from papyrus to
Google Docs in one leap. Even if the
goal is impossible right now, you simply
don't have the resources which may be
invented over the next few years to
achieve that thing. So what I'm saying
is most of your excuses for not
achieving a goal is a sign of low
intelligence. I'm sorry because you have
more than enough resources. You can buy
freaking chat GPT for $20, even though I
don't like chat GP. You can buy Claude
for $20. Now when I talk about goals,
this is what I'm talking about. I'm
speaking from the lens of teology or the
Greek cosmos with a K, which is that
everything serves a purpose. That
everything is a part of a greater whole.
Goals determine how you see the world.
Goals determine what you consider
success or failure. You can try to enjoy
the journey or enjoy the process, but if
you pursue the wrong goal, you will not
enjoy it. Your mind is the operating
system for reality. That system is
composed of goals. For most people,
those goals are assigned to them,
programmed like lines of code in your
psyche. Go to school, get a job, get
offended, play victim, retire at 65, a
known path that doesn't work. So to
become intelligent, you must reject the
known path, dive into the unknown, set
new, higher goals to expand your mind,
embrace the chaos, and allow for more
growth. Study the generalized principles
of nature, and become a deep generalist.
That leads us into point number six
perfectly, which is how to launch into a
completely new life in one day. Now, I
wrote this tweet a few years ago and it
just went it popped off. I wasn't
expecting so many people to actually
resonate with this. And it was the best
periods of my life always came after a
period of getting absolutely fed up with
the lack of progress I was making. So,
how do you dig into your mind? How do
you become aware of your conditioning?
How do you reach profound insights and
truths that change the trajectory of
your life? The answer is through the
simple but often painful act of
questioning, which is something that so
few people do. And you can tell by how
they speak or give their thoughts on a
specific topic. It's like you're talking
to a TV or the news or the most popular
social media posts. Questioning is
thinking, and very few people do it. So,
I want to give you a comprehensive
protocol that you can use to reset your
life every year or whenever you feel
like you need to. And this protocol
consists of questions which will tie
together into the form of a a list of
things that you can just focus on. Now,
this will require a full day to
complete. It's a full day. I need you to
take your time and actually do this. I'm
asking you one day to change your entire
life. You will need a pen, a paper, and
an open mind. Now when I observe the
patterns in people who successfully flip
their identity, it happens rather quick
after this buildup of tension or
disease. Now specifically I've noticed
three phases that most people go
through. So you need to go through these
phases as well. Phase one is dissonance
where they feel like they don't belong
in their current life and become
sufficiently fed up with their lack of
progress. Phase two is uncertainty. So
they don't know what comes next. So they
either experiment or get lost and feel
worse. And phase three is discovery
where they discover what they want to
pursue and make six years of progress in
six months. Now, I say that before going
into the questions because you need to
understand like how it feels, how to
know, you need the feedback as to
whether or not what you're doing is
correct because most of the time that
feedback, those three phases aren't
comfortable. You're not immediately just
going to be like, "Oh, yes. Oh, I feel
so hyped and so motivated right now."
You're going to feel the opposite. And
that's the good sign. That's also a sign
not to try to mask that up by scrolling
on your phone or getting that next quick
hit of dopamine. So, part one of this
protocol happens in the morning. You're
going to do this first thing. And this
is for psychological excavation where
we're going to uncover what our vision
for the future is and our anti- vision
for the future is to create a frame that
we can operate within. Because that's
the thing. First, in order to change, we
need to create a new frame or lens of
perception or who our identity is going
to be that we can like put on as this
shell. We can shed our old shell like a
crab or a lobster, get into a new one,
and then grow into it until that one
becomes too tight. And then you reach
that point of distance like this doesn't
feel right. I'm not supposed to be at
this point in life. I need to get out of
my shell and find a new one or create a
new one. So, that's what we're doing.
Now, I'm going to go through these
questions. I suggest that you write them
down, screenshot them, do whatever you
can so that you have them ready tomorrow
morning when you actually do this. Or
just come back to this video and skip to
this point and create a calendar event
or reminder so that you actually do
this. And I'm just going to run through
these questions, so pay attention. What
is the dull and persistent
dissatisfaction you've learned to live
with? Not the deep suffering, but what
you've learned to tolerate. What do you
complain about repeatedly, but never
actually change? Write down three
complaints you voiced most often this
past year. For each complaint, what
would someone who watched your behavior,
not your words, conclude that you
actually want? What truth about your
current life would be unbearable to
admit to someone you deeply respect? So,
those questions are meant to make you
aware of the pain in your current life.
So, now we need to turn those into what
I call an anti- vision, which is a
brutal awareness of the life that you do
not want to live. That way, you can use
that negative energy when you need it to
aim in a positive direction. So, these
are the questions to come up with your
anti- vision. If absolutely nothing
changes for the next 5 years, describe
an average Tuesday. Where do you wake
up? What does your body feel like?
What's the first thing you think about?
Who's around you? What do you do between
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.? How do you feel
at 10 p.m.? Now, do the same thing, but
for 10 years? What have you missed? What
opportunities close? Who gave up on you?
What do people say about you when you're
not in the room? You're at the end of
your life. You live the safe version.
You never broke the pattern. What was
the cost? What did you never let
yourself feel, try, or become? Who in
your life is already living the future
you just described? Someone 5, 10, 20
years ahead of you on the same
trajectory? What do you feel when you
think about becoming them? What identity
would you have to give up to actually
change? What would it cost you socially
to no longer be that person? What is the
most embarrassing reason you haven't
changed? The one that makes you sound
weak, scared, or lazy rather than
reasonable. If your current behavior is
a form of self-p protection, what
exactly are you protecting and what is
the protection costing you? Now, if you
answer those truthfully and if you're in
the right chapter of your life, because
if you're just at the beginning of your
own book, but this helps you reach the
climax, you still have some of a journey
to go on. This may not completely apply
to you just yet. But if it does, then
you will feel this deep sense of disgust
or disease or just you don't feel right.
You have to do something. So now we need
to orient that energy in a positive
direction. We need to create a minimum
viable vision because a vision is like a
product. Your product doesn't start out
the best. It starts out unclear and with
time and practice and experience it gets
better and more polished and more people
like the product. So there's three
questions for your vision. Forget
practicality for a minute. If you could
snap your fingers and be living a
completely different life in 3 years,
not what's realistic, but what you
actually want. What does an average
Tuesday look like? And use the same
level of detail as question five from
before. What would you have to believe
about yourself for that life to feel
natural rather than forced? So, write
the identity statement. I am the type of
person who dot dot dot. What is the one
thing you would do this week if you're
already that person? So, you're going to
answer all of those questions first
thing tomorrow. That leads into part
two, which you're going to do throughout
the day. And this is going to interrupt
autopilot. It's going to interrupt how
you're currently unconsciously living
because those journaling exercises are
cute, but we want real change. And
frankly, that's not going to happen
unless you break the current unconscious
patterns that are keeping you the same.
So throughout the day, I want you to
contemplate on everything that you wrote
in part one. You should just think about
it, right? Question. Let questions
trigger questions and thoughts trigger
thoughts. It's like a a meditation on a
mantra. You're you're thinking about
your vision and anti-vision and you're
just letting ideas spring to mind.
You're not getting distracted by today's
tasks or scrolling on your phone or
whatever it may be. And beyond that, I
don't want you to forget to contemplate.
So, what you're going to do right now is
you're going to go on your phone or on
your computer and you're and you're
going to create reminders or calendar
events with these specific questions
listed inside the reminder or calendar
event. At 11:00 a.m., what am I avoiding
right now by doing what I'm doing? At
1:30 p.m., if someone filmed the last 2
hours, what would they conclude I want
from my life? At 3 or 3:15 p.m., am I
moving toward the life I hate or the
life I want? At 5:00 p.m., what's the
most important thing I'm pretending
isn't important? At 7:30 p.m., what did
I do today out of identity protection
rather than genuine desire? A hint here,
it's most of the things that you do. at
9:00 p.m. when did I feel most alive
today and when did I feel most dead?
Now, part three you're going to do in
the evening. This is for synthesizing
all of the insights that you got
throughout the day. And this is how you
enter a season of progress tomorrow or
the next day. So, if you follow that
process, then I would be pretty
surprised if you don't have at least one
profound life-changing insight that you
came to. So now we need to make those
known, integrate them into who we are,
and act on them to begin solidifying a
new level of mind or a new stage of
development. So here's the questions
that you journal on in the evening after
today. What feels most true about why
you've been stuck. What is the actual
enemy? Name it clearly. It's not
circumstances. It's not other people.
It's the internal pattern or belief that
has been running the show. Write a
single sentence that captures what you
refuse to let your life become. This is
your anti-vision compressed. It should
make you feel something when you read
it. Write a single sentence that
captures what you're building toward
knowing it will evolve. This is your
vision MVP. Now, lastly, we need to
create goals. We need to make this more
practical. We have all the big picture
motivational intrinsic motivation stuff.
But how do we actually act? And again,
these aren't goals that you set for the
sake of achievement. These are lenses,
macro and micro lenses that you can put
on at a certain time to experience the
mind of that point of view and to notice
the right information and to do the
right actions. When you're really
narrowed in on the daily task, then you
don't really think about anything else.
You just do the task. But when you're
really zoomed out to the level of your
vision, then you think about so much.
You have this unbounded uh creativity.
So, three questions here. Your one-year
goal or lens. What would have to be true
in one year for you to know you've
broken the old pattern? One concrete
thing. Your one-mon goal or lens. What
would have to be true in one month for
the one-year lens to remain possible?
Now, your daily goal or lens. What are
two to three actions you can time block
tomorrow that the person you're becoming
would simply do? Now, that was a lot. I
hope that was helpful, but we have one
last piece to lock it all in. Stick with
me here. So, point number seven is turn
your life into a video game. We'll start
this with a quote from Mihi Chicks Mihi.
The optimal state of inner experience is
one in which there is order in
consciousness. This happens when psychic
energy or attention is invested in
realistic goals and when skills match
the opportunities for action. The
pursuit of a goal brings order and
awareness because a person must
concentrate attention on the task at
hand and momentarily forget everything
else. So, you now have all of the
components that lead to a good life. But
now it may be helpful to organize all of
those components into a coherent plan.
So now you're going to pull out a new
piece of paper and you're going to write
down these six things. Anti-vision. What
is the bane of my existence or the life
I never want to experience again?
Vision. What is the ideal life that I
think I want and can improve as I work
toward it? One-year goal. What will my
life look like in one year time and is
that closer to the life I want? One
month project. What do I need to learn?
What skills do I need to acquire? What
can I build that will move me closer to
the one-year goal? Daily levers. What
are the priority needlemoving tasks that
bring my project closer to completion?
Constraints. What am I not willing to
sacrifice to achieve my vision from the
ground up? Now, why is this so powerful?
Why is are those six things so powerful?
Because it to most people it just sounds
like more self-help, productivity mumbo
jumbo. Because those components
literally create your own world. And if
you are meant to pursue that hierarchy
of goals at this stage in your life, you
will have no other option but to become
obsessed. You will feel the pull to
something greater. You will not see
anything else as an option. In essence,
you turn your life into a video game
because games are the poster child for
obsession, enjoyment, and flow states.
They have all the components that lead
to focus and clarity. So, if we reverse
engineer what those components are, we
can live in a state of deeper enjoyment,
less distractions, and more success.
Your vision is how you win, at least
until the game evolves. Your anti-
vision is what's at stake. What happens
if you lose or give up? Your one-year
goal is the mission. This is your sole
priority in life. Your one-mon project
is the boss fight, how you gain XP and
acquire loot. Your daily levers are the
quests, the daily process that unlocks
new opportunities. Your constraints are
the rules, the limitations that
encourage creativity. So you can think
of all of these as just this concentric
set of circles, like a force field that
guards your mind from distractions and
shiny objects. The more you play the
game, right, because this isn't going to
be super potent the first time around,
the more you invest energy into this,
into building or adopting this frame,
the stronger the force field becomes.
And soon enough, it becomes who you are.
And you wouldn't have it any other way.
Thank you for watching. If you enjoyed
this video, please subscribe to my
newsletter where I send out long letters
on behavior change, psychology,
self-improvement, business every week.
Link to that is in the description.
Subscribe for the next video. Thank you
for watching. I really hope it was
impactful to a good 2026. Bye.